 Fishing is the sport of catching fish, typically with a rod, line, and hook. People can fish in either freshwater or saltwater. They can stand on the shore, wade into shallow water, or fish from a boat. People who hunt big-game species, including tuna, marlin, swordfish, and shark, fish on larger boats from “fighting seats” into which they can be strapped. Fishing as a sport is also called sportfishing or angling, and fishers are also known as anglers. (For information on commercial fishing, see fisheries.)

Like hunting, fishing originated as a means of providing food for survival. However, people have been fishing for sport for thousands of years. An Egyptian angling scene from about 2000 BC shows figures fishing with rod and line and with nets. A Chinese account from about the 4th century BC refers to fishing with a silk line, a hook made from a needle, and a bamboo rod. References to fishing are also found in ancient Greek, Assyrian, Roman, and Jewish writings.

Today, fishing for sport is one of the most popular forms of outdoor recreation in the world. It is estimated that about 40 million Americans spend at least one day per year fishing. Large numbers of people in other countries fish as well. The ease of air travel has increased anglers’ access to many areas of the world. It has also introduced them to new sport fish, such as the dorado of South America and the tigerfish of Africa. Even so, the traditionally hunted species, such as salmon, trout, and bass, remain popular species to catch.

Conservation and the wise management of fish stocks are important to ensure that recreational fishing will continue for years to come. As a result, catch-and-release fishing became increasingly popular beginning in the late 20th century. Fisheries management ranges from stocking and replenishing lakes and streams to enhancing existing water quality and habitat. (See also overfishing.)

There are five basic techniques used to catch fish for fun: still fishing, bait casting, fly-fishing, spinning, and trolling. Many variations of each technique can be used, depending on weather and water conditions, the type of fish sought, and the season of the year. A wide range of equipment can be used in each for the same reasons. The potential anglers may select whichever method and whatever type of equipment suits their needs, desires, and budget.

The term still fishing refers to the technique of catching fish without moving from one spot—an anchored boat, a bridge, a dock, or a bank. It is also called bait fishing or bottom fishing. Still fishing is the oldest and perhaps the most common method followed. Because with this technique anglers wait for the fish to come to the bait, patience is required.

The rods used in still fishing are usually 6 to 9 feet (1.8 to 2.7 meters) long. They have a fixed-spool reel that contains monofilament (a single fiber) fishing line. In North America still fishing is usually practiced with conventional bait-casting or spinning tackle, or gear (see below). Anglers using this method in freshwater take bluegills, crappies, perch, carp, catfish, bass, and walleyes. In Britain freshwater anglers usually use this method to catch bream, barb, tench, dace, and other nongame species.
fishhooks

The hook, basic in all types of fishing, is made from tempered steel wire. Many have a barb near the sharp point of the hook. A barb is a small piece of metal in the shape of a triangle. Once hooked, a fish has difficulty in pulling free from it. There are many shapes and sizes of hooks. The larger the number applied to it, the smaller the hook. For hooks larger than size 1, however, the sizes change to aught measurements (2/0 is read as “two aught”) and grow in size sequentially. Therefore, a size 20 hook is smaller than a size 1 hook, and both of those are smaller than an 8/0 hook.

Sinkers—called ledgers in Britain—are weights attached to the line to carry the bait down in the water. They were originally made from lead. However, lead is toxic if ingested. A few countries and some U.S. states have banned the use of lead sinkers because they poison birds and other animals. Sinkers are now made of nontoxic metals such as tin, bismuth, brass, tungsten, and steel. Several types of sinkers exist, and anglers choose which one to use depending on the water conditions. For example, split-shot sinkers are usually small, round sinkers with a groove. Anglers place the groove on the fishing line and squeeze the sides closed, anchoring the sinker to the line. Anglers use split-shot sinkers when fishing in soft currents. Pyramid sinkers look like upside down pyramids with a small wire ring embedded in the flat bottom. Anglers tie the ring on a loop of fishing line so the pointed end of the pyramid hangs below the hook and digs into the soft ocean or river bottom. Anglers use pyramid sinkers when fishing in surf or heavy currents. Each type of sinker comes in assorted weights and sizes.

Bobbers—called floats in Britain—are buoyant objects attached to the fishing line that suspend bait at a chosen depth. They are made of cork or hollow plastic. Anglers suspend the bait at a depth where fish will notice it and in locations near the natural hiding places of fish. These places include sunken weed beds, logs, and underwater rock formations. When a fish bites, the line moves, which often causes the bobber to bob. This movement, which may be slight, alerts the angler that the fish’s mouth is near the hook. The angler raises the rod sharply to set the hook in the fish’s mouth. After reeling the excess fishing line back onto the reel, the angler hoists the fish out of the water. The angler should be careful not to disturb the water more than necessary so that other fish are not frightened away.

Fish eat a wide variety of small animals, and anglers use the animals in still fishing. They are called live bait. The most common North American baits are worms, minnows, crayfish, leeches, and grubs or maggots. Each is impaled on the hook in a different way and where possible in such manner as to permit natural action and thus appear more attractive to the fish. Large earthworms, or night crawlers (Lumbricus terrestris), are cultivated and sold as bait for freshwater fish. In addition to live bait, anglers in Britain often use bread paste, cheese, and small pieces of vegetables and grain.

With the invention of a reel on which a considerable length of line could be wound, anglers no longer found it necessary to use a very long pole to place bait some distance away. A shorter and less-flexible rod made it possible to cast bait to a specific spot. In this way the technique of bait casting came into being. The bait, or lure, heavy enough to pull the line behind it off a reel, is propelled through the air to a desired spot. Bait casting is a popular fishing technique used to catch a large variety of freshwater and saltwater fish, and it is commonly used for trout fishing as well.

A bait-casting rod is generally 5 to 6 feet (1.5 to1.8 meters) in length. Although such rods were originally made from bamboo, most modern rods are made of fiberglass, carbon fiber, or graphite. Affixed to the rod are round metal rings, called guides, through which the line passes. Just ahead of the cork or foam handle of the rod is the seat for the bait-casting reel. Because its gear revolves multiple times for every manual hand turn, this reel is sometimes called a multiplying reel. The amount of line a bait-casting reel holds depends on the line weight and whether it is monofilament or braided. Most bait-casting rods have a level-wind mechanism that lays the line evenly on the reel spool when it is wound up.

The size of the bait-casting line is measured in test figures, from 10- to 20-pound (4,500- to 9,000-gram) test. The figure refers to the weight that the line will support without breaking. Because of the flexibility of the rods, however, it is often possible to catch fish of much heavier weight than the line test used.

Many types of live baits and a thousand different types of artificial lures may be cast with a bait-casting rod and reel. Of the lures, plugs made out of wood, metal, or plastic are the most common. They come in many different shapes and sizes. Most often plugs are fashioned to resemble some type of live bait, such as insects, worms, minnows, crayfish, or frogs. Lures known as spoons are made with shiny metal, and one side may be brightly painted or stamped with designs. These wobble and flash when pulled through the water. There are diving (weighted) plugs for fishing in deep water, light wiggling plugs for splashing along the surface, feathered plugs, and weighted spinners with colored deer hair and rubber legs attached to them. Many lures have triple gangs of hooks hanging from the middle and rear.

A small spring metal device, known as a swivel, is tied to the line near the hook. Many swivels have two metal eyelets connected by a round or barrel-shaped tube that allows the eyelets to turn. Others look similar to safety pins. The swivel makes it easy to change lures in bait casting and prevents the line from twisting as it is pulled through the water.

One common bait-casting error anglers try to avoid is allowing the spool of the reel to unwind faster than the line is pulled out through the guides by the bait or the plug. This action results in a tangle of line on the reel known as a backlash or a bird’s nest (called an overrun in Britain). It can be avoided by applying a slight pressure to the rotating spool with the thumb. Many modern bait-casting reels have screws to adjust spool tension to conform to the weight of the lure being cast and thus help avoid backlashes.

Depending on the type of lure used, the basic bait-casting technique is to cast the lure into spots where fish are likely to be. As soon as the lure hits the water, the line is retrieved by winding in on the reel handle. The act of a fish taking the lure in its mouth is known as the strike. In bait casting the angler sets the hooks immediately by jerking sharply upward on the rod. In some cases, as with larger fish, the angler allows the fish to take line out as it wishes, reeling in line as the fish tires, and keeping a tight line at all times. In this way, the angler is able to bring in large fish without breaking the line or rod.

Anglers use bait casting for many freshwater lake fish, principally muskellunge (muskies), pike, and largemouth and smallmouth bass. They also use bait casting to catch saltwater fish. A bait-casting rod and reel may be used for still fishing or trolling.

The term fly-fishing refers to fishing with lightweight bait and a heavier fishing line than that used for traditional fishing. The rod is used to cast artificial flies made of hair, feathers, or synthetic materials designed to imitate the natural food sources of the fish. The fly angler snaps the long rod back and forth, allowing the heavier weight of the line to propel the nearly weightless fly forward. Anglers developed fly-fishing as a method for catching trout and salmon. Since then, however, fly-fishing has grown to include many different species. Freshwater fly anglers catch bass, panfish, pike, and various species of perch. Saltwater fly-fishing continues to grow in popularity for such species as striped bass, bluefish, permit, bonefish, and tarpon. Fly-fishing is the oldest method of recreational angling, dating back to approximately the year 200 in Macedonia.

A special rod, known as a fly rod, is used in fly-fishing. It is characterized by its length—from 7 to 11 feet (2 to 3.5 meters)—and its flexibility. Early rods were constructed of solid wood, usually hickory or willow. By the mid-19th century, split bamboo from China became the rod material of choice. Bamboo dominated until shortly after World War II, when even lighter rods of hollow fiberglass became popular. In the 1970s a new generation of still lighter and more responsive rods constructed of carbon fiber or graphite began to replace fiberglass.

A fly reel is a simple spool device without gears and is designed merely to hold the line. The common type is known as a single-action reel. The automatic reel has a spring mechanism that, when released with the finger, automatically winds up the line. Only on a fly rod is the reel always attached behind or below the grip.

Fly lines are much thicker in diameter than bait-casting lines because in fly-fishing, the angler casts the line rather than the lure or bait. Fly lines originally were made of braided horsehair or silk. In the 1950s new lines of vinyl-coated nylon with far superior flotation and suppleness were developed. The lines may be the same diameter throughout (level line), graded from a thinner diameter in the middle to a thicker diameter at the hook end (weight forward), or heavier in the middle and tapered toward both ends (double tapered). Sometimes a thick portion is built into a line near one end to give it more weight for casting heavier flies. Such a line is known as a torpedo head line. Fly-fishing anglers also should consider the density of the lines. Some are made to float while others are made to sink.

Because most hooks used for artificial flies are too small to attach directly to a thick fly line and because such a heavy line is too easily seen by wary fish, lighter leaders and tippets are used between the line and fly. The leaders are usually made of nylon and are translucent. They are either level or tapered, as are the fly lines. They are available in 6- to 15-foot (1.8- to 4.6-meter) lengths. The leader attaches to an even lighter piece of nylon called the tippet. The tippet, which should be invisible to fish, connects to the hook.

Artificial flies are constructed to imitate insects and baitfish that are familiar food sources for the fish. Four types of flies are used most commonly. Dry flies are designed to float and represent resting insects. Wet flies and nymphs are fished below the surface, either by drifting with the current or by using an erratic retrieving motion. They imitate drowned insects or the immature larval forms of aquatic insects. Streamers are long, narrow flies designed to imitate minnows and other small baitfish. Flies vary from less than 0.125 inch (0.3 centimeters) to about 10 inches (25 centimeters) in length, depending on the species of fish sought.

As a technique of fishing, spinning, or spin casting, was practiced for many years in Europe but only achieved widespread popularity in the United States in the 1940s. The technique revolves around the reel, so constructed that the line unwinds from the spool without any reel parts moving, much as a sewing-machine thread is taken off the end of its spool. Because friction is eliminated, it is possible in spinning to cast very light lures a long distance with ease and accuracy.

As a method of fishing, spinning falls about midway between bait casting and fly casting in lightness of equipment used and thus in sport afforded the angler. All species of freshwater and saltwater fish commonly caught by either bait or fly casting can also be taken with spinning equipment. In many cases inexperienced anglers find a spinning rod and reel much easier to operate than a bait-casting reel. In addition, since anglers can cast spinners at long distances and need not approach the quarry as closely, there is less risk of frightening the fish.

Like other fishing rods, spinning rods used to be made of bamboo. Today, however, they are generally made of fiberglass, carbon fiber, or graphite. Spinning rods are generally 6 to 10 feet (1.8 to 3 meters) long. Anglers choose rod length based on the type of fish they are catching and the conditions in which they are fishing. In general, longer rods mean a longer cast distance. The cork or foam handle ranges in length from 12 to 20 inches (30.5 to 50.8 centimeters). This long handle enables the angler to clamp the reel to the rod in a position to balance the equipment. Spinning-rod guides are larger than those on bait-casting and fly rods and allow the line complete freedom of movement.

Spinning lines are made of either braided or single strand nylon, graded in test weights like casting lines. Those commonly used range from 6- to 10-pound (2,700- to 4,500-gram) test. One hundred yards or more of such line can be wound on a spinning reel.

A large number of special lures have been developed for spinning. They resemble bait-casting lures such as plugs, spinners, and spoons, but they are smaller and lighter to more easily integrate with the lighter weight of the rod. A hollow plastic bubble filled with a desired amount of water for weight may be used with spinning tackle. It is affixed to the line 2 to 3 feet (0.6 to 1 meter) ahead of the lure and enables the spin angler to cast the lightest and tiniest artificial flies.

Spin casting differs from bait casting in the manipulation of the reel and line. To cast, the line is picked up by the tip of the index finger of the hand holding the rod. The bail, or pick-up finger, on the reel is put in casting position, so that the line is free to run off the spool without interference. When the line hits the water the angler begins to reel in (retrieve) the line. As soon as the retrieve is started, the bail automatically snaps into pick-up position to wind the line on the spool. Spinning reels permit a fish to run with the line while the angler is reeling in.

One advantage of spinning over bait casting is that the rod is held in position with the guides downward and the reel underneath. Thus, an angler does not have to change hands to reel in the line, as the reel handle is in proper position. Spinning reels are available for both right- and left-handed casters.

The technique of hooking and reeling in a fish with a spinning outfit is similar to that used in bait casting. Because of its versatility, spinning is a good all-around technique for a beginner and will take almost any fish.

Trolling is the term applied to a technique of fishing in which the bait or lure is towed through the water behind a moving boat. Because a large area of water can be covered, it is a very successful method of taking fish when all others fail. Trolling is usually done inland on lakes and reservoirs, but it is also the primary method for big-game fishing in the oceans.

Trolling rods are usually 5 to 7 feet (1.5 to 2.1 meters) long. These rods are heavier, stiffer, and shorter than other rods because heavy weights and long lengths of line are frequently used. A more limber rod would cause many missed strikes. Anglers troll with lures as well as with live bait. Lures are much like those used in bait casting. The correct depth and speed of the lure are crucial in the method. The introduction of sonar equipment in the second half of the 20th century greatly increased the effectiveness of trolling. Salmon, large trout, walleye, and pike are the main species fished.

Fishing tackle, or gear, developed over thousands of years. One of the earliest tools for fishing was a gorge, the predecessor of the fishhook. A gorge is a piece of wood, bone, or stone about 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) in length that is pointed at both ends. It was covered with some kind of bait. When a fish swallowed the gorge, a pull on the line wedged it in the fish, which could then be pulled in.

When copper and bronze came into use, a hook was one of the first tools made from metal. It was attached to a hand-operated line made of animal or vegetable material strong enough to hold and land a fish. People then began to attach the other end of the line to a pole. At first the pole was probably a stick or tree branch. This practice made it possible to fish from the bank or shore.

For over a thousand years, the fishing pole remained short, not more than a few feet (a meter or so) in length. The earliest references to a longer, jointed rod are from Roman times, about the 4th century AD. As with the earliest poles made from branches, the first longer rods were made of wood. They would continue that way well into the 19th century.

The first period of great improvement came about the mid-17th century, when Izaak Walton and Charles Cotton were writing The Compleat Angler (1653). During this time an angler might attach a wire loop or ring at the tip end of the rod. This loop allowed a free-running line, which was useful for both casting and catching a hooked fish. This method intensified the need to develop a means of taking up and storing longer lines and led to the invention of the fishing reel.

Experiments with material for the line led to the use of a gut string and of a lute string in the second half of the 17th century. The use of a landing hook, or gaff, for lifting large hooked fish from the water followed. In the 1650s English inventor Charles Kirby improved methods of fishhook making. He invented the Kirby bend, a distinctive shape of hook that is still in common use worldwide.

While evidence exists that the Chinese developed a rudimentary fishing reel in the 3rd century AD, modern reel design dates back to 18th-century England. The predominant British reel of the day was called the Nottingham reel. It was a free-spooling reel, ideal for allowing line and bait or lure to float with the current. By 1770 a rod with guides for the line along its length and a reel were in common use. The first true modern reel was a geared multiplying reel attached under the rod, in which one turn of the handle moved the spool through several revolutions. These reels became popular in the United States and inspired the bait-casting reel devised by Kentucky watchmaker George Snyder in 1810.

About the same time, rod materials were undergoing major changes. Softer, imported woods replaced the heavy woods native to Britain and North America. By the end of the 18th century, bamboo became the rod material of choice. Several strips of bamboo were glued together to give strength and pliancy in a thinner, lighter rod. By 1870 bamboo rods were being produced on both sides of the Atlantic.

After 1880 tackle design evolved rapidly. Horsehair fishing lines gave way to lines made of silk, cotton, or linen. The average angler could cast three times farther with these lines, and this increased distance helped spur the development of artificial lures. With longer casting capabilities and more line, a considerable tangle could result. In 1896 an American named William Shakespeare, Jr., devised the level-wind, which automatically spread the line evenly on the reel as it was wound. The next significant development took place in 1905, when English textile magnate Holden Illingworth filed the first patent on the fixed-spool, or spinning, reel. The fixed-spool reel became popular in Europe in the 1930s and in North America and the rest of the world after World War II.

In the first half of the 20th century, rods became shorter and lighter. After World War II fiberglass rods largely replaced bamboo. In the 1970s carbon fiber or graphite became popular. Nylon monofilament line was developed in the late 1930s and became dominant after World War II. Plastic became the chief material for artificial casting lures, replacing various types of wood.